and last night progressive democratic
congresswoman alexandria ocasio-cortez
used new york's fashion charity event
the med gala to make a political
statement she wore a white dress with a
message emblazoned in bold gold red tax
the rich you know that this dress has a
message for this met gala tell me about
what that is
it's right there
but it's really about
having a real conversation about
fairness and equity in our system and i
think that this conversation is
particularly relevant as we debate on
the budget
you know budget reconciliation bill for
me what speaks louder is the actual
governing and legislating right so the
stunts like this
i don't know i i don't i don't really
think are really effective and come
across slow cringy they're all gonna
talk about this so what does that do
yes if you're looking at only from like
a selfish point of view he gets aoc in
the press and if you're a politician
that is incredibly well played okay
let's keep it real but it also gets the
message out and that's why i'm in favor
of it so i think the message is out
there though
no but is it out at the met gala
people let's let's start with the facts
let's throw up this chart on screen here
real quick okay what do you see here
from 1960 to 2015
has poverty gotten worse no
inequality got worse
but inequality got worse only because
the rich got richer not because the poor
poor
these issues are a emotive and people
tend to look at these charts and only
see what they want to see
now bernie sanders is no fool he avoids
using the rhetoric of saying that the
rich are getting richer and the poor
getting poor because i think he is aware
that it is not true factually that the
poor are getting poorer
but most people look at a chart like
this one
and they just see what they want to see
if you look at the bottom of the chart
see the number zero zero percent there
for the poor to be getting poorer
their lines would have to be below
zero
because this is a chart showing
average real household income
growth
the growth the percentage growth they're
all growing they're all growing above
zero percent 10 20 and so on the first
time i presented these charts on screen
i received emails written with withering
contempt from left-wing people who
presume themselves to be much better
educated in economics than i am he said
to me oh oh you poor dear
your trouble is you don't understand the
concept of inflation and i had to reply
no no
your problem is
you don't understand the meaning of the
word
real
if you look up the word real
in the dictionary the technical use of
the term seen at the top of this chart
means
adjusted
for inflation and this conflict with my
audience could not be more ironic
because i opened the discussion by
cautioning my audience that they are so
emotionally committed to seeing what
they want to see
to justifying their beliefs by
disregarding the evidence that's right
in front of their face that they're
going to continue to misinterpret the
facts no matter how plainly i set them
out and explain them and i cannot tell
you how many people have looked at this
chart and listened this video and
refused to believe the numbers on the
chart with one excuse or another but let
me tell you something
the problem with this chart
is not inflation the problem is that it
doesn't live up to your ideological
expectations of what it's supposed to be
this chart is showing you that the poor
are getting less poor in the united
states of america right
but
the rich are getting richer much much
more rapidly look at this chart very
easy to be emotive about this very easy
to be irrational about it what does this
actually show yes this shows that the
top 1
have become spectacularly wealthy
they've become much much more wealthy in
this span of time and note that this
chart ends in the year 2007 or 2008 for
whatever reason this is not as as
current not as up-to-date a chart okay
but what does this show about the poor
the poor
are not getting poorer between 1960 and
the present
inequality has gotten worse in america
but not poverty
inequality and poverty
are two very different things
right now in the democratic primaries in
the debates for who will be the next
president of states the debates for who
will be the figurehead leader of
america's left-wing mainstream party
lies are being told about this
constantly and the problem
is not just that those lies they're
factually wrong the problem is that
they're misleading they really lead to a
false perception of what america's
problems are and very false assumptions
about what the solutions are and what
the outcomes will be the red line on
this chart is the really important line
it says consumption poverty now what
does that mean the word consumption has
many meanings in english consumption
poverty so i my university degree my
first university degree is political
science
i learned this in the classroom from the
textbook it was covered very briefly in
the university education and then i
learned it in the real world when i went
to cambodia and did social science
research there in the non-profit
humanitarian sector okay
the most important way to measure
poverty is by people's consumption
so in the united states of america you
might ask questions like
do you own
shoes
how many years have you been wearing the
same pair of shoes
do you eat in restaurants
how many times this month have you eaten
a restaurant how much money in total
have you spent
eating in a restaurant and then you have
to calibrate
the statistics you've got to reflect
what is the standard of poverty in that
society in the united states of america
poor people can't eat in restaurants or
can't eat there regularly poor people
have to pack a sandwich and take it with
them to save money so they don't eat
lunch in a restaurant now this is almost
universal in different societies you're
going to be measuring different levels
of poverty um in the united states it's
accepted without questioning it that a
person can own a car
and still be considered poor they can
have a person who owns a car and owns
many pairs of shoes and eats in a
restaurant and that they're still poor
so how you calibrate it where you set
the cutoff line for someone being in
poverty versus not in poverty is
significant but the way to measure that
is by measuring
consumption
not not
by measuring income not through relative
measures of poverty if you use relative
poverty the bottom twenty percent of
people are then always going to be poor
you get a self-fulfilling prophecy
statistically when we were in cambodia i
remember debating this with my boss
um the measures of poverty he really
favored were things like the roof of
your house what is the roof what
material is the roof of your house made
of which is
interesting measure of poverty um you
know do you own a cellular phone or not
things like this because
his experience with cambodian society
these were the first things people would
spend money on as soon as they had some
security as soon as that little bit of
income to a little bit of income to
waste they would improve the tiling on
their roof
that's just to do with the torrential
rain that it's so loud it's so noisy
the rain beating down on the other of
your house
so when you look at the red line on this
chart
what you see is a dramatic
dramatic decline in poverty since the
year 1960 okay
and
the black line
there is some decline but that's been
wavering along it's relatively
relatively stagnant okay
that sharp sharp decline
on the red line
you cannot
cannot say
honestly
that the poor are getting poorer in the
united states of america
that is false
okay the poor have become the poor have
become dramatically fewer in number or
you can say the poor are less and less
poor however we are in a period of time
in which the rich get richer now there
was a quotation i copied out here so
someone claimed at the latest democrat
party uh primary debates that we have
had 40 years
of no economic growth
for 90
of the people
that's not that's not what this chart
shows
not the first person to try to debunk
these myths here's a quotation from the
washington post by meg kelly
the nonpartisan congressional budget
office reported that the bottom four
quintiles so the poorer
four-fifths of society saw an average
income growth of 32 percent between 1979
and 2015
before transfers and taxes if you
include the difference made by taxes and
transfers then the middle three
quintiles
saw a 46
increase in income but the poorest of
the poor the lowest quintile the lowest
quintile saw a 79
increase in income during that span of
time 1979 to 2015 so the rhetoric within
the democrat party within the mainstream
left and of course it's even worse on
the far left amongst the extremists the
rhetoric has fundamentally become
detached from reality now the other
canard the other excuse that's given to
direct us away from these facts
and to keep using this meme this false
meme this misleading meme that the
problem with the united states of
america is that the rich are getting
richer and the poor getting poorer it's
not so
it's to say oh well even if you think
the poor are doing okay you know in
donald trump's america and the current
economy even if you think that it's not
true because
they're working such long hours they're
working multiple jobs look at this chart
what do you what do you see about that
what do you see there
get it's not true
it is not true believe it or not the
rich people the rich people are really
the purple line those are the extremely
wealthy we get several different levels
of rich people rich people are working
longer hours okay
i don't find that surprising in the past
rich people relied on other human beings
to help them out they had servants and
secretaries increasingly if you meet
people who are millionaires not
multi-billionaires because people have
over a million dollars they do
everything themselves they don't have a
secretary they don't have a travel agent
they use their computers and they book
everything themselves they do all the
work themselves i think it's really true
that you know high income people whether
they be medical doctors or architects or
or owners of small businesses they now
work very very long hours and that's
what this that's what this chart shows
the people who are working shorter hours
are the red line
so the red line here this isn't the
poorest of the poor you can see if you
you look at the the this is the relative
poor and this is the
majority of society
they are not working longer hours
you can see very clearly the trend and
especially interestingly the the trend
in in recent years
so
um what's the problem with this approach
i'm saying this partly because i want to
set up a discussion of issues in in the
future video probably the next video i
make um
the problem is
that the quality of life people have in
america is absolutely awful
and that problem cannot be solved
by raising the wages of employees at
amazon
from 14 and 25 cents per hour to 15 an
hour it's not going to make that kind of
difference it's not going to make that
dramatic difference for the people at
amazon it's not going to make that
disneyland either i followed those
arguments very closely when bernie
sanders presented them and even the
particular case studies he presented
were really misleading and dishonest
i do completely sympathize with the the
movement to raise minimum wage i
completely sympathize with it but you
know have you been to los angeles have
you have you been to san francisco why
are there huge numbers of homeless
people on the streets
it's not because of the difference
between
fourteen dollars an hour and fifteen
dollars an hour for people who already
have a steady job at amazon or disney
world it's not
okay
obviously anyone talk to anyone who has
real world experience working with the
homeless in the 21st century obviously
the single most outstanding issue is
drug addiction
including addiction to painkillers as
well as you know recreational drugs
illicit drugs illegal drugs okay drug
addiction is an enormous vector for
homelessness vagrancy and extreme
poverty in the united states of america
there's no denying it what is it that
makes life so unpleasant for the working
poor so you know now not talking about
vagrants or homeless people for the
working poor in the united states of
america one of the single greatest
issues is public transportation los
angeles is hell everyone needs to own a
car and working poor people they may be
spending 50 of their income on their car
and car related expenses you know making
the down payments on their car and
insurance and yet at some extent fuel
gasoline is relatively cheap these days
but you know the the cost imposed on
them by having a car and the misery of
having to drive more than an hour every
day back and forth to work this is a
huge cost imposed on the whole society
due to having terrible infrastructure
and this is true in los angeles it's
true in detroit it's true in many parts
of the united states life is not like
that in the south of france if you ask
why is the quality of life higher in the
south of france it's not something
simple like oh well it's the minimum
wage it's not something simple like oh
it's andrew yang's crazy idea of having
universal basic income in the south of
france they have a beach
the train goes right up to the beach
you can get out of the train you can pay
five dollars to take the train you know
it's not free but it's cheap obviously
built at taxpayers expense etc and poor
people and rich people alike
can take their kid and get on the train
and get out get out and go swimming on
the beach the poor and the millionaires
alike all enjoy this you know this
natural splendor
thanks to the government building
infrastructure that enables it okay why
is life better in the south of france
than it is in los angeles
because of the cost of education because
of the cost of health care now just i'll
just throw this this chart up on screen
everyone knows this right this is the
misery of modern life in america and
this absolutely will not be broached it
will not be solved it will not be
improved by raising minimum wage nor
through andrew yang's you know universal
basic income proposal okay and this is
not even talking about rent one of the
most fundamental miseries in the 21st
century is the cost of rent and no
government wants that wants to deal with
it
neither left wing nor right when nobody
neither democrat nor republican nobody
wants to talk about how you can really
help the poor by having you know housing
that works for them housing that doesn't
require them to drive two hours back and
forth their place employment housing
that doesn't cost them 50 of their
income
etc etc this is a huge crushing problem
in the united states of america and it
is in some other countries around the
world high rent crisis is not universal
and there are government policies to
deal with it okay
the most fundamentally dangerous element
of the left wing blaming the problem on
the rich are getting richer the poor
getting poorer this false this factually
false meme
their statement of the problem is
misleadingly simplistic
and this is training public opinion
to endorse and commit to
solutions that are even more
misleadingly simplistic
indeed in my opinion dangerously so
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice